

--- PAGE 1 ---

High-speed Railway 3 (2025) 175–184
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
High-speed Railway
journal homepage: www.keaipublishing.com/en/journals/high-speed-railway
Research article
Modeling and performance analysis of GNSS-based train positioning system
]]
]]
with colored petri nets ]]]]]]
Shuting Chena,b, Daohua Wua,b,⁎ , Jiang Liua,c,d, Siqi Wanga,d
a School of Automation and Intelligence, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
b National Research Center of Railway Safety Assessment, Collaborative Innovation Center of Railway Traffic Safety, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
c State Key Laboratory of Advanced Rail Autonomous Operation, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
d Frontiers Science Center for Smart High-speed Railway System, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China
A R T I C L E I N F O A B S T R A C T
Keywords: Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS)-based continuous and accurate train positioning is one of the key
GNSS-based train positioning technologies for advanced train operations such as train virtual coupling. However, GNSS-based train posi-
Positioning performance tioning faces significant challenges in real-world scenarios due to environmental complexities and signal in-
Environment scenario terferences. Considering this issue, this paper presents an approach for modeling and performance analysis of
GNSS signal interference
GNSS-based train positioning systems using Colored Petri Nets (CPNs). By systematically modeling the GNSS
Colored petri Nets
signal reception and processing process, the performance of the positioning system under various environment
scenarios is evaluated. The system model integrates three types of interference signals (i.e., Amplitude
Modulation (AM) signals, Frequency Modulation (FM) signals, and pulse signals) while incorporating environ-
mental factors such as terrain obstructions and tunnel shielding. Additionally, the Extended Kalman Filter (EKF)
algorithm is employed to process GNSS observation data, providing accurate train position estimations. The
simulation results demonstrate that signal interferences and complex environmental conditions significantly
affect the GNSS-based positioning accuracy. This study offers a comprehensive framework for evaluating the
performance of GNSS-based train positioning systems in different scenarios, highlighting critical factors that
influence positioning accuracy and stability.
1. Introduction accuracy [5,6]. However, these works lack a comprehensive perfor-
mance analysis of GNSS-based positioning in real-world operational
With the increasing demand for operation safety and efficiency in environments such as tunnels and mountainous terrains, where signal
rail transportation, train virtual coupling has been proposed and be- interferences and obstructions occur frequently.
come a hot research topic in recent years. For virtual coupling, con- One of the critical challenges in applying GNSS-based train posi-
tinuous and accurate train positioning is a cornerstone. Due to the tioning is analyzing its performances under various operational condi-
global coverage and high availability, Global Navigation Satellite tions including that GNSS signals are interfered with by interference
Systems (GNSSs) have been widely employed for train positioning [1]. signals such as Amplitude Modulation (AM) signals, Frequency
However, GNSS-based positioning faces significant challenges in com- Modulation (FM) signals, and pulse signals, or obstructed by mountains
plex operational environments such as mountainous regions and tun- and tunnels. Traditional approaches often fail to intuitively represent
nels, where signal obstructions and interferences lead to accuracy de- the dynamic interactions of GNSS signals and the environmental effects
gradation. on positioning accuracy. To this end, this paper proposes a Colored
Extensive researches have focused on the application of GNSS in Petri Net (CPN)-based approach to analyze the performance of GNSS-
train positioning, specifically under idealized conditions with unin- based train positioning systems. CPNs provide a powerful framework to
terrupted and unobstructed signal reception [2–4]. Existing methods, describe the dynamic behaviors and concurrent processes of GNSS
such as Extended Kalman Filters (EKFs) and data fusion with inertial signal reception, signal interferences, and environmental impacts of the
sensors, have been demonstrated notable in improving positioning positioning systems. The objective of this study is to evaluate the
⁎
Corresponding author.
E-mail address: wudaohua@bjtu.edu.cn (D. Wu).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.hspr.2025.05.001
Received 14 January 2025; Received in revised form 30 April 2025; Accepted 6 May 2025
Available online 14 May 2025
2949-8678/© 2025 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. on behalf of KeAi Communications Co. Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/).

--- PAGE 2 ---

S. Chen, D. Wu, J. Liu et al. High-speed Railway 3 (2025) 175–184
performance of the GNSS-based positioning systems under varying verification. In this work, we adopt CPNs [16] as the formal modeling
operational scenarios including open areas, mountainous terrains, and framework to study the impact of signal interferences and environ-
tunnels while incorporating signal interferences and EKF data fusion for mental factors on GNSS-based train positioning. Petri nets are formal
higher accuracy. modeling languages that are well-known for systems characterized as
The main contributions of this paper are as follows. concurrent, synchronous, distributed, etc. Some application examples
adopting petri nets as the means of description for railway signaling
1) A novel CPN-based modeling framework for GNSS-based train po- systems can be found in Refs. [17–22].
sitioning systems is developed.
2) Dynamic influences of signal interferences (i.e., by AM signals, FM
signals, pulse signals) and environmental obstructions (i.e., by 3. System modeling with CPNs
mountains and tunnels) are incorporated into the model.
3) The performance of the GNSS-based train positioning system is Fig. 1 illustrates the modeling framework of a GNSS-based train
quantitatively evaluated under various scenarios with the CPN positioning system comprising the following main parts: GNSS Re-
model of the system. ceiver, Environment Scenarios, Interference Signals, GNSS Position
Solution, and Evaluation Module. The module GNSS Receiver selects
2. Related works specific environment scenarios and receives GNSS signals. The
module Environment Scenarios is composed of three submodules:
Over the past decades, GNSS-based systems have been extensively ap- Open Area Scenario, Mountain Occlusion Scenario, and Tunnel and
plied to train positioning due to their global coverage and high accuracy Exit Tunnel Scenario. These submodules simulate various real-world
under favorable conditions [1,7]. Despite these advantages, challenges such conditions while generating GNSS signal interferences, i.e., GNSS
as signal interferences and terrain-induced occlusions continue to pose signals are interfered with by AM, FM, and pulse signals. In the
questions on high positioning accuracy and stability. Numerous studies have module GNSS Positioning Solution, the EKF algorithm is employed to
explored techniques to mitigate the impacts of signal interferences on GNSS- process interfered GNSS signals for estimating the train’s position.
based positioning accuracy [8–12]. For example, Ref. [9] investigates the The module Evaluation compares the calculated position with the
impact of continuous wave interference on GNSS receiver tracking perfor- reference position and outputs the positioning error. Fig. 2 clearly
mance, examining the extent of its influence by varying data bit durations illustrates the hierarchical relationships between modules of the CPN
or integration times. To address interference-related challenges, an inter- model, providing a structured view of their layered organization. The
ference energy detection method and a comprehensive orientation tech- declarations of the model are categorized and summarized in two
nology tailored for GNSS are introduced in Ref. [11]. Besides, a number of tables for clarity. Table 1 provides the colset declarations and their
researches have examined the impact of environmental factors along respective descriptions, while Table 2 provides the variable declara-
railway lines on GNSS signal integrity. For instance, Ref. [13] explores tions and their respective descriptions.
methods of scenario-based weighted measurement noise calculation and
fault detection combined with state recognition based on integrity evalua-
tion in autonomous train positioning systems. Some studies have achieved 3.1. Top-level of the positioning system model
high positioning accuracy in partially obstructed or challenging environ-
ments by fusing multi-sensor data [6,14,15]. The top-level of the CPN model is shown in Fig. 3. Each substitution
In contrast to studies that mainly investigate GNSS signal inter- transition corresponds to a specific component of the system archi-
ferences in isolation, this paper integrates environmental factors and tecture. The commands or feedbacks are represented by the tokens on
signal interferences into the formal model of the positioning system. By the places. The GNSS Receiver processes GNSS signals transmitted by
utilizing model simulation, the proposed approach enables a quantita- the satellite constellation. Using the EKF algorithm, the system per-
tive evaluation of the system’s performance. This method provides a forms a position solution to determine the train’s position at the current
systematic analysis and verification of the interactions among signal time. The calculated position coordinates are then evaluated against
interferences, environmental conditions, and train positioning. reference coordinates for performance analysis. This evaluation assesses
Due to the rigorous mathematical foundation, formal methods have the positioning accuracy of the GNSS-based train positioning system
gained recognition as effective tools for system modeling and under various environment scenarios and signal interferences.
Fig. 1. Modeling framework of train positioning system considering signal interferences and environmental factors.
176

--- PAGE 3 ---

S. Chen, D. Wu, J. Liu et al. High-speed Railway 3 (2025) 175–184
Fig. 2. Hierarchical architecture of the CPN model.
Table 1
Definitions and descriptions of colsets.
Colset definition Description
colset BOOL = bool; Abooleanvalue(true/false).
colset INT = int; Anintegervalue.
colset INTTIME = int timed; Atimedintegervalue.
colset REAL = real; Arealnumber.
colset SIGNAL = record id: INT * psr: REAL * psr_rate: REAL
* x: REAL * y: REAL * z: REAL * vx: REAL * Represents a signal record containing data from a single satellite.
vy: REAL * vz: REAL * clk: REAL * Thisincludespseudorange,pseudorangerate,position,velocity,and
azimuth: REAL * elevation: REAL * satellitemetadatasuchasclockbiasandelevation.
Rate_clock: REAL;
Representsthecompletesetofsatellitedataavailabletothereceiver
colset SIGNALlist = list SIGNAL; ataspecificmomentintime.ItcontainsalistofSIGNAL records,one
foreachsatelliteinview.
Represents a comprehensive dataset for multiple consecutive time
points, including all satellite data (SIGNALlist) available to the re-
colset SIGNALLIST = product INT * INT * SIGNALlist;
ceiver,alongwithanassociatedtimestampandsequencenumberfor
eachepoch.
colset SCENARIO = with OpenArea | Mountain | Tunnel; Differentenvironmentscenarios.
colset STATEINFE = with AM | FM | Pulse | Normal; InterferencestatessuchasAM,FM,Pulse,andNormal.
colset Coordinate = product REAL * REAL * REAL; A3Dcoordinate.
colset COORDINATE = product INT * Coordinate; Acoordinatewithanassociatedtimestamp.
colset DELTAPOSITION = product INT * Coordinate * REAL; Positionaldifferencewithanassociatedtimestampanderrorvalue.
colset TIMESTAMP = REAL; Atimestamp.
colset HEIGHT = REAL; Height.
colset DISTANCE = REAL; Distance.
colset MOUNTAIN = product HEIGHT * DISTANCE; Mountainparameterswithheightanddistance.
colset TUNNELSTATE = with InTunnel | JustOut | OutTunnel; Stateoftraininrelationtoatunnel.
colset TUNNEL = REAL; Tunnel-relateddata.
3.2. Module GNSS Receiver environment, processing signal interferences, and producing
observation results.
The module GNSS Receiver, illustrated in Fig. 4, is designed to To simulate the behavior of GNSS signals under different environ-
simulate the complete process of GNSS signal reception and proces- ment scenarios , the model incorporates three submodules tailored for
sing of a train-mounted receiver. It performs the following key representative conditions: open areas, mountainous terrain with ob-
functions: receiving satellite signals, identifying the train’s operating structions, and tunnels. These submodules enable realistic error
177

--- PAGE 4 ---

S. Chen, D. Wu, J. Liu et al. High-speed Railway 3 (2025) 175–184
Table 2
Variable declarations and descriptions.
Variable declaration Description
VisibleBDS, SigInfo: SIGNALLIST; Listofvisiblesatellites.
Envi: SCENARIO; Environmentscenario.
InterferenceData, InterferenceData1: SIGNALLIST; GNSSsignaldataunderinterferences.
Mutex: MUTEX; Amutualexclusionvariable.
StateInterference: STATEINFE; Stateofsignalinterference(e.g.,AM,FM,Pulse,orNormal).
deltaPosition: DELTAPOSITION; Errorbetweenthecalculatedpositionandthereferenceposition.
Boolean variables indicating the presence of AM, FM, or pulse
bAM, bFM, bPulse: BOOL;
interference.
AMError, FMError, PulseError: REAL; ErrorcausedbyAM,FM,andPulseinterferencerespectively.
Stateoftrain’spositioninthetunnelscenario(e.g.,InTunnel,JustOut,
TrainPosition, TrainPosition1: TUNNELSTATE;
OutTunnel).
DelayError, TimeCounter, TimeCounter1: TIMESTAMP; Timecounters.
position, TrackCoordinate, BDS_ENU: COORDINATE; Positionoftrain.
For the transition AM Interference, amplitude-modulated inter-
ference signals are generated by multiplying a low-frequency sinusoidal
envelope (1 Hz) with a high-frequency carrier wave centered at
1575.42 MHz, corresponding to the GNSS L1 band. This configuration
produces a time-varying envelope with a modulation depth of 0.5, ef-
fectively simulating realistic amplitude fluctuations observed in Radio
Frequency (RF) interference sources. A similar signal interference set-
ting is illustrated in Ref. [23]. Dynamic amplitude variations can sig-
nificantly degrade GNSS signal reception, particularly in high-noise or
contested environments.
The transition FM Interference simulates frequency-modulated
signal interference by generating two sinusoidal components with
Fig. 3. Top-level of the CPN model.
symmetrical frequency deviations around a carrier frequency centered
at 1575.42 MHz, corresponding to the GNSS L1 band. These deviations
are sampled from a Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation of
75 kHz, emulating the spectral characteristics of typical FM broadcast
signals [24]. This approach captures the dynamic spectral spreading
commonly observed in real-world RF interference.
The transition Pulse Interference generates periodic pulse signals to si-
mulate sudden and intense bursts of RF energy. It samples two random
parameters: the pulse width Tp which represents the duration of each pulse,
and the pulse interval Ti which defines the spacing between successive
pulses. A uniformly distributed amplitude between 1 and 5 simulates the
varying severity of the interference. At each time step, the model checks
whether the current time modulo the total pulse period Tp + Ti falls within
the pulse’s active duration. If so, an interference signal of the specified
amplitude is emitted; otherwise, it remains zero. This periodic pulsed
structure reflects typical burst-like interference patterns observed in GNSS
Fig. 4. Module GNSS Receiver. environments [25], characterized by sharp, short-lived increases in signal
strength followed by rapid attenuation.
modeling under different operational conditions. The transition Choose The input data enter the module through the input places Open Area
Scenario fires to select the corresponding substitute transition based on and GNSS Signal, representing the GNSS satellites and the initial en-
the token moving from Scenario to Choose Scenario. The tokens on the vironmental conditions. The place Bool Control and transition Mutex
place GNSS Signal, representing the visible GNSS signals received, serve manage the logic for introducing signal interference, with the code in
as the input data source. After processing, the output tokens move to Mutex ensuring that the generation processes for different interference
the place of GNSS Observation. types do not conflict. Each interference signal is integrated into the
GNSS data by firing the transition Interference. The GNSS data affected
3.2.1. Submodule Open Area by signal interferences proceed to the observation output stage con-
Fig. 5 illustrates the CPN model designed to simulate the impacts of trolled by the place GNSS Number. The final results are outputted from
GNSS signal interferences on the observation signals. This model in- the output place GNSS Observation.
troduces three typical types of interference signals, i.e., AM, FM, and
pulse signals. Boolean variables are used to control the activation of 3.2.2. Submodule Mountain
each interference type. This design ensures that the generation process Fig. 6 illustrates the shielding effect of mountainous terrain on GNSS
of each interference signal is both independent and easily manageable. signals. In addition to incorporating AM, FM, and pulse signal inter-
Additionally, it accurately reflects the characteristics of realistic signal ferences, the module introduces environmental factors of mountain
interference environments. height, terrain data, and obstruction distance. These elements are used
178

--- PAGE 5 ---

S. Chen, D. Wu, J. Liu et al. High-speed Railway 3 (2025) 175–184
Fig. 5. Submodule Open Area.
to filter out signals from satellites that are obstructed by the terrain. The Inside the tunnel, a train is shielded by the structure blocking
places Mountain Height and Distance store mountain elevations and GNSS signal reception. During this phase, the place GNSS Signal
spatial relationships between the terrain and GNSS signal paths. These remains empty indicating the complete obstruction of satellite sig-
serve as the foundational data for modeling and analyzing how terrain nals. When the train just exits the tunnel, the GNSS signals become
features obstruct satellite signals. The transition Mountain Data Fusion visible again. However, due to the complex environmental condi-
and its code are responsible for integrating and transmitting these data. tions near the tunnel exit, such as multipath effects, signal reflec-
The place GNSS Signal stores the initial GNSS satellite data. The tions, and delays, the GNSS observation data contain significant er-
transition Mountain Scenario integrates mountain height and obstruc- rors. This process is modeled by the code of the transition Tunnel
tion distance information with current visible satellite data to filter out Scenario, which integrates the tunnel state from the place Tunnel
obstructed signals. This process assesses satellite visibility by com- with visible satellite information. Over time, as the GNSS signal re-
paring each satellite’s elevation angle with the obstruction angle de- ception stabilizes, the positioning errors gradually decrease. This
rived from the mountain height and the receiver’s distance to the dynamic adjustment is governed by the place Time Counter. The
mountain. If a satellite’s elevation angle is lower than the obstruction place GNSS Observation outputs the GNSS data affected by the tunnel
angle, it is deemed as obstructed and excluded from the positioning scenario, including both the high-error initial data and the stabilized
calculations. After the firing of the transition Mountain Scenario, the high-accuracy data. This module effectively captures the three-phase
GNSS data are stored in the place Data with Mountain Error. impact of tunnel scenarios on GNSS signal reception: complete signal
Additionally, visible satellite data are combined with interference sig- loss inside the tunnel, significant errors immediately after exiting,
nals and output to the place GNSS Observation. By incorporating a and eventual signal stabilization outside the tunnel.
mountainous terrain scenario, this module effectively simulates the
dynamic impact of terrain obstructions on GNSS signal visibility in 3.3. Module GNSS Position Solution
complex environments.
Fig. 8 illustrates the process of transforming GNSS observations into
3.2.3. Submodule Tunnel train positions. GNSS observations, received from the GNSS Receiver
Fig. 7 illustrates the process of GNSS signal reception and error variation module, are sequentially processed by the transition EKF. The com-
for a train in a tunnel scenario. It focuses on the dynamic impact of the pletion of the EKF process is indicated by the output flag bEKF=true,
tunnel environment on the satellite signal visibility and positioning accu- which signals readiness for subsequent evaluation. Due to the limited
racy. In this module, the places InTunnel, Just Out, and Out Tunnel re- matrix computation capability of CPN, the tokens on the place Position
present the train’s current state, including three phases: inside the tunnel, are generated with MATLAB. The pseudocode of the GNSS data pro-
just outside the tunnel, and completely outside the tunnel. cessing workflow and position solution is presented in Algorithm 1.
179

--- PAGE 6 ---

S. Chen, D. Wu, J. Liu et al. High-speed Railway 3 (2025) 175–184
Fig. 6. Submodule Mountain.
Algorithm 1. GNSS data processing and position solution. 3.4. Module Evaluation
Module Evaluation in Fig. 9 is designed to dynamically assess the
functionality of the train positioning system. The primary functions of
the module include selecting GNSS environment scenarios, initiating
GNSS data simulation, and calculating positioning errors. The module
calculates the error distance between the position computed from si-
mulated GNSS observations and the reference position by using the
Euclidean distance formula in three-dimension:
d= (x x)2+(y y)2+(z z)2
2 1 2 1 2 1 (1)
where (x1, y1, z1) represents the reference position coordinates, (x2, y2,
z2) represents the calculated position coordinates, and d is the com-
puted error distance.
The resulting error values are then output via the place Delta
Position. The environment scenario is dynamically selected through the
firing of the transition Select Environment Scenario. The coordinate
values stored on the place Reference Position originate from an actual
train trajectory, representing a segment of real-world train movement.
This dataset serves as a benchmark and is precisely aligned with the
GNSS signal data. The calculated positional information is input into
the module via the place Position, and it is compared to the reference
position data. The transition Calculate Position Error is deployed to
compute the error using Eq. (1).
180

--- PAGE 7 ---

S. Chen, D. Wu, J. Liu et al. High-speed Railway 3 (2025) 175–184
Fig. 7. Submodule Tunnel.
occurrence sequences. These findings together demonstrate the model’s
soundness, boundedness, and finite execution. The existence of dead
markings suggests that certain process branches reach terminal states
where no further transitions are possible. This behavior is consistent
with the expected functioning of the train positioning system, where a
positioning cycle may conclude or the process may terminate early due
to data filtering or error detection.
To simulate train positioning, loops are added to the model. Each
Fig. 8. Module GNSS Position Solution.
unit of time in the model corresponds to one second in the real world. A
simulation running for 600-time units represents ten minutes of station
4. Simulation and analysis results operation. To facilitate data analysis, a breakpoint monitor is set to halt
the simulation when the model time exceeds 600-time units.
To ensure the correctness of the CPN model, formal verification is The dataset used for the simulation is based on a segment of the
essential. Table 3 presents part of the standard state space report for the actual Jing–Shen high-speed railway. Track coordinates are derived
developed model. The state space is complete, comprising 5365 mark- from field measurements, while satellite ephemeris data are obtained
ings and 6410 arcs. The Strongly Connected Component (SCC) graph from standard RINEX broadcast ephemeris files. At each observation
contains the same number of nodes and arcs, indicating the absence of epoch along the track, visible satellites and their corresponding signal
cycles in the state space. The verification was performed using five parameters are calculated. Specifically, satellite positions are de-
representative input datasets, which cover all potential operational termined using broadcast ephemeris data through standard GNSS or-
paths of the system. This ensures that the generated state space fully bital propagation models. True pseudoranges are computed based on
captures the range of behaviors that the model can exhibit under dif- the geometric distance between the satellite and the receiver, assuming
ferent input conditions. The home properties show that the initial ideal signal propagation without any observation errors. Azimuth and
marking is not a home marking. According to the liveness properties, elevation angles are computed by transforming the satellite coordinates
the model includes 648 dead markings, but no dead or live transition into the local horizon coordinate system relative to the receiver’s po-
instances. The fairness properties confirm that there are no infinite sition. These computations adhere to established GNSS observation
181

--- PAGE 8 ---

S. Chen, D. Wu, J. Liu et al. High-speed Railway 3 (2025) 175–184
Fig. 9. Module Evalution.
Table 3 angles, and azimuth angles. An example of the input data is shown
Part of information of the standard state space report. below.
Statistics
State space
Nodes: 5365
Arcs: 6410
Secs: 1
Status: Full
SCC Graph
Nodes: 5365
Arcs: 6410
Secs: 0
Home properties
Home markings
None
Liveness properties
Dead markings
648 [5365, 5364, 5363, 5362, …]
Dead transition instances
None 4.1. Positioning performances under different signal interference scenarios
Live transition instances
None Table 4 presents a comparative analysis of GNSS-based train posi-
Fairness properties
tioning performances under various signal interference scenarios: in-
No infinite occurrence sequences.
terference-free condition (normal) and conditions that are interfered
with by three types of interference signals: AM, FM, and pulse
modeling techniques, ensuring the reality and accuracy of the simula- signals. The analysis focuses on key metrics such as mean error, stan-
tion inputs. Each data entry includes information for a specific ob- dard deviation, and their respective components in the UTM coordinate
servation epoch, such as ephemeris time, true pseudoranges, elevation system.
Table 4
Positioning performances under different signal interferences.
Scenario Mean Standard Expected Normalized Helmert Expected Normalized Helmert directional
error/m deviation/m directional directional directional directional standard directional standard standard
mean/m mean/m mean/m deviation/m deviation/m deviation/m
Normal 1.0279 0.0552 0.2085 0.9477 −0.2189 0.2426 0.0714 0.0776
AM 4.9484 4.0833 0.1436 1.0626 −0.2124 2.5681 2.5527 5.1820
FM 6.2241 5.2630 0.3715 1.0194 −0.0632 3.3917 3.4981 6.4434
Pulse 4.7925 3.6242 0.2009 1.1515 −0.6216 2.2564 2.4293 4.8330
182

--- PAGE 9 ---

S. Chen, D. Wu, J. Liu et al. High-speed Railway 3 (2025) 175–184
Table 5
Positioning performances under different environment scenarios.
Scenario Mean Error/m Standard Expected Normalized Helmert Expected Normalized Helmert
deviation/m directional directional directional directional directional directional
mean/m mean/m mean/m standard standard standard
deviation/m deviation/m deviation/m
Open Area 1.0279 0.0552 0.2085 0.9477 −0.2189 0.2426 0.0714 0.0776
Mountain Occlusion 1.2979 0.4528 0.2950 1.1064 −0.4783 0.2567 0.2791 0.4535
Tunnel 5.6670 6.6901 −0.1565 0.9020 −3.8520 1.5354 1.2680 7.5652
Under interference-free conditions, the positioning system demon-
strates high accuracy and stability, with a mean error of 1.0279 m and a
standard deviation of 0.0552 m. However, under signal interference
conditions, the system’s performance degrades significantly. The AM
signal interference increases the mean error to 4.9484 m and the stan-
dard deviation to 4.0833 m, with the elevation direction showing the
most significant fluctuations. This is likely due to the AM signal inter-
ference directly affecting signal power through amplitude variations,
leading to enhanced vertical errors. The FM signal interference causes
even more severe impacts, with the mean error rising to 6.2241 m and
the standard deviation of 5.2630 m. The FM signal interference in-
troduces frequency shifts exacerbating Doppler effects and significantly
increasing error fluctuations in the eastward and northward directions.
The pulse signal interference characterized by periodic bursts of high-
intensity disruption, results in a mean error of 4.7925 m and a standard
Fig. 10. Position errors in tunnel scenario.
deviation of 3.6242 m. Despite a lower mean error compared to the FM
signal interference, the pulse signal interference significantly affects all
three spatial dimensions. This is due to its transient and repetitive impact of tunnel environments and their transitions on GNSS-based
nature which destabilizes signal reception and disrupts GNSS compu- positioning performance.
tations. These findings demonstrate that different types of signal in-
terferences uniquely affect GNSS-based positioning accuracy. The FM 5. Conclusion
signal interference exerts the most severe impact followed by pulse and
AM signal interference. The elevation direction is the most sensitive to This paper presents a CPNs-based approach to evaluate the perfor-
such disruptions, highlighting the direct influence of signal interference mances of GNSS-based train positioning systems under real-world op-
characteristics on positioning stability in different directions. erational conditions. By constructing a hierarchical CPN model, the
study successfully models the process of GNSS signal reception and
4.2. Positioning performances under different environment scenarios interferences, as well as the impacts of complex environmental factors
on the GNSS-based train positioning. The simulation results emphasize
Table 5 provides a detailed analysis of the performances of the po- that signal interferences (i.e., interfered by AM, FM, and pulse signals)
sitioning system under three distinct environmental scenarios: Open have a significant impact on the GNSS-based positioning accuracy, with
Area, Mountain Occlusion, and Tunnel. Key metrics of mean error, FM interference exerting the most pronounced effects, particularly in
standard deviation, and UTM coordinate system components are com- the vertical direction. Environmental factors like terrain obstructions
pared to assess the accuracy and stability of the system. This compar- and tunnel shielding further degrade signal visibility and increase po-
ison highlights the impact of different environmental conditions on sitioning errors. The model also identifies critical challenges during
positioning performances. signal reacquisition, particularly in tunnel transitions, which exacerbate
In open areas, it exhibits high precision with a mean error of error growth.
1.0279 m and minimal fluctuation, highlighting its robustness under While the proposed approach effectively demonstrates the impact of
unobstructed conditions. However, in mountainous environments, the various signal interferences and environmental conditions on the per-
mean error increases to 1.2979 m, reflecting the effects of signal mul- formance of the GNSS-based train positioning, future research could
tipath and obstructions caused by complex terrain, with the elevation explore the integration of additional signal interference mitigation
direction being particularly sensitive to these factors. Tunnel scenarios techniques to improve the accuracy and stability of the GNSS-based
show the most pronounced degradation with a mean error of 5.6670 m. positioning for railway applications.
This dramatic increase results from severe signal blockages in tunnels
and the instability during signal reacquisition after exiting the tunnel. CRediT authorship contribution statement
Fig. 10 illustrates the evolution of position error in the tunnel en-
vironment. During the “Inside the Tunnel” phase, GNSS signals are Siqi Wang: Writing – review & editing, Software, Data curation.
completely blocked by the surrounding structure, resulting in a loss of Shuting Chen: Writing – original draft, Validation, Methodology,
positioning capability (represented by the gray shaded region). Upon Formal analysis. Daohua Wu: Writing – review & editing, Supervision,
exiting the tunnel (marked by the vertical dashed line), the system Methodology, Conceptualization. Jiang Liu: Writing – review &
begins to reacquire GNSS signals; however, due to severe multipath editing, Funding acquisition, Conceptualization.
effects and signal obstructions, the initial position errors are sig-
nificantly large. As the train moves further away from the tunnel exit, Data Availability
the surrounding environment improves, leading to a gradual reduction
in error, which eventually stabilizes. This trend highlights the critical Data will be made available on request.
183

--- PAGE 10 ---

S. Chen, D. Wu, J. Liu et al. High-speed Railway 3 (2025) 175–184
Declaration of Competing Interests [10] K. Parlin, T. Riihonen, Analog mitigation of frequency-modulated interference for
improved GNSS reception, 2000 International Conference on Localization and GNSS
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial (ICL-GNSS), IEEE, Tampere, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[11] L. Zhang, B. Tang, C. Zheng, et al., A navigation interference detection and orientation
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influ-
technology based on GNSS handheld terminal, China Satellite Navigation Conference
ence the work reported in this paper. (CSNC 2022), Springer, Singapore, 2022, pp. 542–551.
[12] I. Ilie, D. Fortin, J. Landry, et al., Real-world interferences’ impacts analysis using
high dynamic range gnss RF/IF signals record and playback, Proceedings of the
Acknowledgement
22nd International Technical Meeting of the Satellite Division of The Institute of
Navigation (ION GNSS 2009), Savannah, 2009, pp. 38–48.
This work was supported by the National Key Research and [13] B. Wu, Research on GNSS/INS based train positioning performance evaluation
method, Doctoral thesis, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 2022.
Development Program of China (2023YFB3907300), the Fundamental
[14] X. Li, H. Wang, S. Li, et al., A tightly couple GNSS PPP/INS/LiDAR method for
Research Funds for the Central Universities (2024JBMC002), and the precise vehicle navigation, Satel. Nav. 2 (2021) 26.
National Natural Science Foundation of China (T2222015, U2268206 ). [15] P. Wang, X. Diao, Research and application of haar wavelet transformation in train
positioning, Math. Pro. Eng. 2022 (2022) 6545817.
[16] K. Jensen, L.M. Kristensen, Coloured Petri Nets: Modelling and Validation of
References Concurrent Systems, Springer, Berlin, 2009.
[17] T. Murata, Petri nets: Properties analysis and applications, Pro. IEEE 77 (1989)
[1] D. Mikhaylov, C. Amatetti, T. Polonelli, et al., Toward the future generation of 541–580.
railway localization exploiting RTK and GNSS, IEEE Trans. Instru. Measure. 72 [18] C. Girault, R. Valk, Petri Nets for Systems Engineering: A Guide to Modeling,
(2023) 8502610. Verification, and Applications, Springer, Berlin, 2013.
[2] M. Sengupta, Choice of sensor fusion framework for train positioning system, WIT [19] D. Wu, D. Lu, T. Tang, Qualitative and quantitative safety evaluation of train
Trans. Built Environ. 199 (2020) 5364. control systems (CTCS) with stochastic colored petri nets, IEEE Trans. Int. Trans.
[3] T. Kitano, Y. Ota, S. Taniguchi, et al., On-board train positioning and train integrity Sys. 23 (8) (2021) 10223–10238.
management system by combination of tachometer generators and inertial sensors, [20] K. Ji, L. Chai, S. Li, et al., Collision risk evaluation and verification of GNSS-based
Q. Rep. RTRI 61 (2) (2020) 114–119. train integrity detection, Appl. Sci. 11 (16) (2021) 7764.
[4] Z. Wang, G. Yu, B. Zhou, et al., A train positioning method based-on vision and [21] D. Wu, J. Liu, H. Wang, et al., A CPN-based approach for studying impacts of
millimeter-wave radar data fusion, IEEE Trans. Instru. Measure. 23 (2021) communication delays on safety and availability of safety-critical distributed net-
4603–4613. worked control systems, IEEE Trans. Indust. Inf. 18 (5) (2021) 3033–3042.
[5] L. Zhang, Research on EKF based GPS/ODO integrated positioning method, Master’s [22] T. Zhang, X. Li, D. Wu, et al., Evaluating the safety control scheme of railway
thesis, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, 2016. centralized traffic control (CTC) system with coloured petri nets, Sustainability 14
[6] J. Otegui, A. Bahillo, I. Lopetegi, et al., Evaluation of experimental GNSS and 10- (18) (2022) 11669.
DOF MEMS IMU measurements for train positioning, IEEE Trans. Instru. Measure. [23] F. Taylor, E. Gattis, L. Trapani, et al., Software defined radio for GNSS radio fre-
68 (2019) 269–279. quency interference localization, Sensors 24 (2023) 72.
[7] Z. Zang, Operation and maintenance technology of air-ground integrated “Digital [24] F.B. daSilva, E. Cetin, W.A. Martins, Radio frequency interference mitigation via
Twins” based on BIM and GIS for intelligent Beijing—Zhangjiakou high speed nonnegative matrix factorization for GNSS, IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst. 59
railway, Railw. Trans. Econo. 44 (9) (2022) 139–145. (2022) 3493–3504.
[8] M.J. Murrian, L. Narula, P.A. Iannucci, et al., First results from three years of GNSS [25] F. Soualle, M. Cattenoz, K. Giger, et al., Improved analytical models of snir
interference monitoring from low Earth orbit, Navigation 68 (2021) 673–685. degradation in presence of pulsed signals and impact of code-pulse synchrony,
[9] J. Jang, M. Paonni, B. Eissfeller, CW interference effects on tracking performance of 5th European Workshop on GNSS Signals and Signal Processing, Toulouse,
GNSS receivers, IEEE Trans. Aero. Electr. Sys. 48 (1) (2012) 243–258. France, 2011.
184